AN 7.95 - Observing Impermanence in the Eye
Translated by Bhikkhu Sujato
Source: https://suttacentral.net/an7.95/en/sujato
License: CC0-1.0

Numbered Discourses 7.95
10. Worthy of Offerings
Observing Impermanence in the Eye
“Mendicants, these seven individuals are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world. What seven?
First, take an individual who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. They perceive impermanence and experience impermanence. Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind and fathom with wisdom. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom. And they live having realized it with their own insight in this very life due to the ending of defilements. This is the first individual who is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world.
Next, take an individual who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. … Their defilements and their life come to an end at exactly the same time. This is the second individual who is worthy of offerings …
Next, take an individual who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. … With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished between one life and the next. …
With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished upon landing. …
With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished without extra effort. …
With the ending of the five lower fetters they’re extinguished with extra effort. …
With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. … This is the seventh individual.
These are the seven individuals who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with cupped palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world.”
