[page 1]
SN 46.14 
Mahāvagga Saṁyutta (The Great Collection) 
Bojjhaṅga Saṁyutta (Connected Discourses on The Seven Factors of Awakening) 
Gilāna Vagga (The Section on Getting Sick) 
 
Kassapa Bojjhaṅga Sutta 
“Kassapa & the Seven Factors of Awakening” 
or 
Pathama Gilāna Sutta 
“On Getting Sick – Part 1” 
Translated by Bhikkhu Candana 
Copyright © Bhikkhu Candana 2022 
 
 
This is what I personally heard. 
 
Once, while The Blessed One was living near Rājagaha, at the Bamboo Forest by the Squirrels' 
feeding ground, the Venerable Mahā Kassapa, who at the time was also staying in Rajagaha but 
in the Pipphali Cave, became physically sick, and was now suffering much as a result of his 
illness. 
 
Then, having come out of His seclusion in the early evening hours, The Blessed One went and 
visited the Venerable Mahā Kassapa and sat down on the seat made ready for Him. Once seated, 
The Blessed One then addressed the Venerable Mahā Kassapa by saying: 
 
“Kassapa, I hope you’re keeping well. How are you feeling now? Are you feeling better? Are the 
painful feelings you’re experiencing getting less or more severe? I hope it is the ending of the 
painful feelings that you are noticing, not their increase.” 
 
“Bhante, I’m not keeping well at all. I’m not feeling better, and instead I am experiencing much 
suffering, as the painful feelings are getting far worse. Bhante, it is the increase of the painful 
feelings that I’m noticing, not their decrease.” 
 
“Kassapa, I have taught you the Seven Factors of Awakening, and their benefits have been well 
explained by me which, when cultivated and fully developed within oneself, lead to direct and 
perfect understanding, to Full Awakening, to Nibbāna. What are these seven?"

[page 2]
The Mindfulness Awakening Factor, Kassapa, has been well explained by me which, when 
cultivated and fully developed within oneself, leads to direct and perfect understanding, to Full 
Awakening, to Nibbāna. 
 
The Investigation of States Awakening Factor, Kassapa, has been well explained by me which, 
when cultivated and fully developed within oneself, leads to direct and perfect understanding, to 
Full Awakening, to Nibbāna 
 
The Persevering Effort Awakening Factor, Kassapa, has been well explained by me which, when 
cultivated and fully developed within oneself, leads to direct and perfect understanding, to Full 
Awakening, to Nibbāna. 
 
The Joy Awakening Factor, Kassapa, has been well explained by me which, when cultivated and 
fully developed within oneself, leads to direct and perfect understanding, to Full Awakening, to 
Nibbāna. 
 
The Tranquility of Mind Awakening Factor, Kassapa, has been well explained by me which, 
when cultivated and fully developed within oneself, leads to direct and perfect understanding, to 
Full Awakening, to Nibbāna. 
 
The Collected Stability of Mind Awakening Factor, Kassapa, has been well explained by me 
which, when cultivated and fully developed within oneself, leads to direct and perfect 
understanding, to Full Awakening, to Nibbāna. 
 
The Equanimity Awakening Factor, Kassapa, has been well explained by me which, when 
cultivated and fully developed within oneself, leads to direct and perfect understanding, to Full 
Awakening, to Nibbāna. 
 
“These Seven Factors of Awakening, Kassapa, have all been well explained by me which, when 
cultivated and fully developed within oneself, then lead to direct and perfect understanding, to 
Full Awakening, to Nibbāna.” 
 
“They most Certainly do, O Blessed One! For they are the Factors of Awakening.  
Indeed, O Fortunate Happy One! They are indeed the Factors of Awakening.” 
 
This is what the Buddha said, and the Venerable Mahā Kassapa, being gladdened in his heart, 
delightedly approved the words spoken by the Blessed One.  
 
Thereupon, the Venerable Mahā Kassapa recovered from the sickness afflicting him, and the 
physical suffering that was the result of the Venerable Mahā Kassapa’s illness simply 
disappeared. 
 
 
Sadhu 
 Sadhu 
 Sadhu
