[page 1]
SN 51.81 
Saṁyutta Nikāya 
Mahāvagga Saṁyutta (On the Great Section) 
 
Iddhipāda Saṁyutta  
Connected Discourses on the Four Bases of Psychic Powers 
 
Ogha Vagga 
The Section on the Floods 
 
Anusaya Sutta 
“The Underlying Drives” 
 
 
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven underlying drives.  
 
“What are they?  
 
“The underlying drive one has for lusting after sensuality and further stimulation; the underlying 
drive to oppose and disagree; the underlying drive for holding on to views and convictions; the 
underlying drive for doubting; the underlying drive for conceit; the underlying drive for wanting 
to be reborn; and the underlying drive for wanting to remain ignorant. 
 
“These are the seven underlying drives. 
 
“Now, to address these seven, the Four Bases of Psychic Power must be cultivated and 
developed, in order to attain The Higher Knowledge; to know directly and intuitively; to fully 
understand and with complete certainty go about destroying and removing these seven 
underlying drives. 
“And what are these four?  
1. “Here, Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu strives by cultivating the base of psychic power that grows as a 
result of concentration impelled by fervor, accompanied by active endeavor, while thinking to 
himself:  
“I will neither let my fervor become too slackened, nor too strained; neither letting it become 
constricted internally nor distracted or scattered externally.”  
2. “Further, Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu strives by cultivating the base of psychic power that grows as 
a result of concentration impelled by persevering effort, accompanied by active endeavor, while 
thinking to himself:

[page 2]
“I will neither let my persevering effort become too slackened, nor too strained; neither letting it 
become constricted internally nor distracted or scattered externally.”  
3. “Further, Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu strives by cultivating the base of psychic power that grows as 
a result of concentration impelled by the directed mind, accompanied by active endeavor, while 
thinking to himself:  
“I will neither let my directed mind become too slackened, nor too strained; neither letting it 
become constricted internally nor distracted or scattered externally.”  
4. “Further, Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu strives by cultivating the base of psychic power that grows as 
a result of concentration impelled by examination, accompanied by active endeavor, while 
thinking to himself:  
“I will neither let my examination become too slackened, nor too strained; neither letting it 
become constricted internally nor distracted or scattered externally.”  
“Therefore, Bhikkhus, these Four Bases of Psychic Power must be cultivated and developed, in 
order to attain The Higher Knowledge; to know directly and intuitively; to fully understand and 
with complete certainty go about destroying and removing these seven underlying drives.” 
 
Sādhu 
 
 Sādhu 
 
 Sādhu
