[page 1]
SN 52.8 
Saṁyutta Nikāya 
Mahāvagga Saṁyutta (On the Great Section) 
 
Anuruddha Saṁyutta  
Connected Discourses on Anuruddha 
 
Rahogata Vagga 
The Section on Seclusion 
 
Salaḷāgāra Sutta  
“The Frankincense-tree Hut” 
 
Translated by Bhikkhu Candana 
Copyright © Bhikkhu Candana 2023 
 
 
At one time the Venerable Anuruddha was staying in the vicinity of Sāvatthī, living at the 
frankincense-tree hut. It was during that time when the Venerable Anuruddha addressed the 
Bhikkhus and said:  
 
“Friends, imagine how even though the River Ganges meanders, slants, and makes its way 
towards the east, a large crowd of determined people would gather with their shovels and 
buckets, declaring:  
 
‘We have decided to make this River Ganges meander, slant, and make its way towards the west, 
instead!’  
 
“Now, what do you think, friends? Would they have a chance at succeeding in their attempt?”  
“No, friend. And why do we say this? It is because the River Ganges river meanders, slants, and 
makes its way towards the east. It would be difficult, if not impossible for them to make it 
change course and start meandering, slanting, and make its way towards the west, instead. 
Because, that large crowd will certainly get exhausted and frustrated, and soon give up in their 
futile efforts.”  
“In just the same manner, friends, when a Bhikkhu dedicatedly cultivates and developes the Four 
Establishments of Mindfulness meditation, and with strong earnestness, even if rulers, their kings 
and ministers, friends or associates, relatives or family members were to offer him wealth, while 
trying to persuade him, by saying:  
‘Please, sir, why let these ocher robes frustrate or stymie you? Why keep shaving your head and 
carrying an alms bowl around to get your food? Come now, return to what the bald-headed ones

[page 2]
call the ‘lower lifestyle,’ and freely enjoy wealth and pleasures, while also making merits at the 
same time!’  
“Now, friends, it would simply be impossible for a Bhikkhu who is dedicatedly cultivating and 
developing the Four Establishments of Mindfulness meditation, and with strong earnestness, to 
give up the training and return to the lower lifestyle of a householder.  
“And why do I say this?  
“It is because for a long time that Bhikkhu’s heart has enjoyed meandering, slanting, and making 
its way towards seclusion. Therefore, it is simply impossible for such a Bhikkhu to return back to 
the lower lifestyle of a householder.  
“And how, friends, does a Bhikkhu dedicatedly cultivate and develop the Four Establishments of 
Mindfulness meditation, and with strong earnestness?  
1. “Friends, he meditates while observing whatever experiences that arise or take place 
internally, within the body; he meditates while observing the disappearance of whatever 
experiences that were taking place internally, within the body; he meditates while observing both 
the appearance and disappearance of whatever experiences that occur internally, within the body. 
In this manner, he continues meditating while mindfully observing and staying with the body 
with keen interest and careful attention, without having any desire to avoid nor lean into the 
experience, nor desiring to change or fight the truth of whatever is taking place.  
“Further, he meditates while observing whatever experiences that arise or take place externally, 
on the body; he meditates while observing the disappearance of whatever experiences that were 
taking place externally, on the body; he meditates while observing both the appearance and 
disappearance of whatever experiences that occur externally, on the body. In this manner, he 
continues meditating while mindfully observing and staying with the body with keen interest and 
careful attention, without having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to 
change or fight the truth of whatever is taking place.  
“Further, he meditates while observing whatever experiences that arise or take place both, 
internally within and externally, on the body; he meditates while observing the disappearance of 
whatever experiences that were taking place both, internally within and externally, on the body; 
he meditates while observing both the appearance and disappearance of whatever experiences 
that occur both, internally within and externally, on the body. In this manner, he continues 
meditating while mindfully observing and staying with the body with keen interest and careful 
attention, without having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to change 
or fight the truth of whatever is taking place.  
2. “Similarly, friends, the Bhikkhu meditates while observing whatever feelings that arise or take 
place internally, within; he meditates while observing the disappearance of whatever experiences 
that were taking place internally, within; he meditates while observing both the appearance and 
disappearance of whatever experiences that occur internally, within. In this manner, he continues 
meditating while mindfully observing feelings with keen interest and careful attention, without 
having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to change or fight the truth 
of whatever is taking place.

[page 3]
“Further, he meditates while observing whatever feelings that arise or take place due to external 
causes; he meditates while observing the disappearance of whatever experiences that were taking 
place due to external causes; he meditates while observing both the appearance and 
disappearance of whatever experiences that occur due to external causes. In this manner, he 
continues meditating while mindfully observing feelings with keen interest, careful attention, 
without having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to change or fight 
the truth of whatever is taking place.  
“Further, he meditates while observing whatever experiences that arise or take place both 
internally, within and due to external causes; he meditates while observing the disappearance of 
whatever experiences that were taking place both internally, within and due to external causes; 
he meditates while observing both the appearance and disappearance of whatever experiences 
that occur both internally, within and due to external causes. In this manner, he continues 
meditating while mindfully observing feelings with keen interest, careful attention, without 
having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to change or fight the truth 
of whatever is taking place.  
3. “Similarly friends, the Bhikkhu meditates while observing whatever mental states that arise or 
take place internally, within; he meditates while observing the disappearance of whatever mental 
states that were taking place internally, within; he meditates while observing both the appearance 
and disappearance of whatever mental states that occur internally, within. In this manner, he 
continues meditating while mindfully observing mental states with keen interest, careful 
attention, without having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to change 
or fight the truth of whatever is taking place.  
“Further, he meditates while observing whatever mental states arising due to outside causes; he 
meditates while observing the disappearance of whatever mental states arising due to outside 
causes; he meditates while observing both the appearance and disappearance of whatever mental 
states arising due to outside causes. In this manner, he continues meditating while mindfully 
observing mental states with keen interest, careful attention, without having any desire to avoid 
nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to change or fight the truth of whatever is taking place.  
“Further, he meditates while observing the mental states that arises or take place both internally, 
within and those arising due to outside causes; he meditates while observing the disappearance 
of whatever mental states that were taking place both internally, within and those arising due to 
outside causes; he meditates while observing both the appearance and disappearance of whatever 
mental states that occur both internally, within and those arising due to outside causes. In this 
manner, he continues meditating while mindfully observing mental states with keen interest, 
careful attention, without having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to 
change or fight the truth of whatever is taking place.  
4. “Similarly friends, the Bhikkhu meditates while observing the relationships of whatever 
phenomena that arise or take place internally within; he meditates while observing the 
disappearance of relationships of whatever phenomena that were taking place internally within; 
he meditates while observing both the appearance and disappearance of the relationships of 
whatever phenomena that occur internally within. In this manner, he continues meditating while 
observing the relationships of phenomena with keen interest, careful attention, without having

[page 4]
any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to change or fight the truth of 
whatever is taking place.  
“Further, he meditates while observing the relationships of whatever phenomena arising due to 
outside causes; he meditates while observing the disappearance of the relationships of whatever 
phenomena arising due to outside causes; he meditates while observing both the appearance and 
disappearance of the relationships of whatever phenomena arising due to outside causes. In this 
manner, he continues meditating while observing the relationships of phenomena with keen 
interest, careful attention, without having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor 
desiring to change or fight the truth of whatever is taking place.  
“Also, he meditates while observing the relationships of whatever phenomena that arise or take 
place both internally within and those arising due to outside causes; he meditates while 
observing the disappearance of the relationships of whatever phenomena that were taking place 
both internally within and those arising due to outside causes; he meditates while observing both 
the appearance and disappearance of the relationships of whatever phenomena that occur both 
internally, within, and those arising due to outside causes. In this manner, he continues 
meditating while observing the relationships of phenomena with keen interest, careful attention, 
without having any desire to avoid nor lean into the experience, nor desiring to change or fight 
the truth of whatever is taking place.  
“Therefore, friends, it is in this manner that a Bhikkhu dedicatedly cultivates and develops the 
Four Establishments of Mindfulness meditation, with strong earnestness.” 
 
 
Sādhu 
 
Sādhu 
 
Sādhu
