[page 1]
Snp 5.4 
Sutta Nipāta 
Pārāyana Vagga 
 
Puṇṇakamāṇavapucchā Sutta  
“Venerable Puṇṇaka’s Questions” 
 
Translated by Bhikkhu Candana 
 
Copyright © Bhikkhu Candana 2023 
 
 
 
1043. “‘O! Unshakeable Teacher, who clearly sees the root of all things, there is a question I’ve 
come to ask,” said the Venerable Puṇṇaka, as he continued: 
‘Why have the sages, human beings, warrior kings and brahmins in the world, been making 
sacrifices to the gods all this time, and continue to do so? I kindly ask on this matter, may The 
Blessed One please tell me the answer to this.’ 
 
1044. “And The Blessed One replied: 
‘All those sages, human beings, warrior kings and brahmins in the world have been making 
sacrifices to the gods, and continue to do so, for the simple reason that they all must face 
sickness and old age, but they hope to somehow gain rebirth into a better state, Puṇṇaka.’ 
 
1045. “‘Bhante, has anyone among those sages, human beings, warrior kings and brahmins in 
the world,’ continued the Venerable Puṇṇaka, ‘while being so meticulous and dedicated in the 
rituals of making those offerings and sacrifices to the gods, been able to break free, by crossing 
over and completely overcoming the cycles of rebirth and death? I kindly ask The Blessed One to 
please give me the answer to this.’ 
 
1046. “And The Blessed One continued in His reply: 
 
‘Whether by wishing, beseeching, begging, extolling, or praising, they have all been offering and 
making sacrifices for the simple reason of gaining more opportunities to enjoy sensual pleasures. 
Thus, I declare that despite all the offerings and sacrifices they make, because they are driven by 
passion, none of those people has been able to break free, or cross over and completely 
overcome the cycles of rebirth and death.’ 
 
1047. “And the Venerable Puṇṇaka asked further: 
‘In that case, Bhante, seeing that none among those people was able to overcome the cycles of 
rebirth and death by the making of offerings and sacrifices to the gods, then, who are the ones, 
Blessed Lord, who did in fact break free, by crossing over, and thus completely overcoming the 
cycles of rebirth and death? Please, may The Blessed One tell me the answer to this.’

[page 2]
1048. “And The Blessed One said: 
 
‘Seeing the world’s vicissitudes, tranquil beyond its highs and lows, he stands unperturbed by its 
troubles, unperplexed, desireless. And with no hidden embers of passions or hopes left in him, it 
is he, whom I declare, the one who remains untouched. For he indeed has broken free, and fully 
crossed over birth and death.’” 
 
Sādhu 
 
Sādhu 
 
Sādhu
