[page 1]
Anguttara Nikāya 
The Numerical Discourses  
 
Dasakanipāta  
(Book of the Tens) 
 
AN 10.2 
 
Cetanākaraṇī Sutta  
“Not Needing the Intention” 
 
Translated by Candana Bhikkhu 
 
Copyright © Candana Bhikkhu 2023 
 
“Bhikkhus, a virtuous person living with wholesome behavior no longer needs to have 
the intention: ‘May non-regret come to me.’ This, because it is only natural at this stage for non-
regret to be experienced by a virtuous person living with wholesome behavior.  
“Someone who has non-regret, no longer needs to have the intention: ‘May delight come to me.’ 
This, because it is only natural at this stage for the person with non-regret to experience delight.  
“Someone who experiences delight, no longer needs to have the intention: ‘May joy come to me.’ 
This, because it is only natural at this stage for the one experiencing delight to also have joy. 
“Someone who is joyful, no longer needs to have the intention: ‘May my body become tranquil.’ 
This, because it is only natural at this stage for the joyful person to experience tranquility 
throughout the body.  
“Someone experiencing tranquility throughout the body, no longer needs to have the intention: 
‘May I feel bliss.’ This, because it is only natural at this stage for the person experiencing 
tranquility throughout the body to feel bliss.  
“Someone experiencing bliss, no longer needs to have the intention: ‘May I experience samādhi.’ 
This, because it is only natural at this stage for the person experiencing bliss to attain to samādhi. 
“Someone experiencing samādhi, no longer needs to have the intention: ‘May I be able to see 
and understand how things really are.’ This, because it is only natural at this stage for the person 
who attains to samādhi to be able to see and understand how things really are.

[page 2]
“Someone who is able to see and understand how things really are, no longer needs to have the 
intention: ‘May I become disenchanted and dispassionate towards the world.’ This, because it is 
only natural at this stage for the person who sees and understands how things really are, to 
become disenchanted and dispassionate towards the world. 
“Someone who becomes disenchanted and dispassionate towards the world, no longer needs to 
have the intention: ‘May I directly know Liberation and experience it, for oneself.’ This, because 
it is only natural at this stage for the person who becomes disenchanted and dispassionate 
towards the world to directly know Liberation and experience it, for oneself. 
“Therefore, Bhikkhus, knowing Release and experiencing it directly for oneself, is the purpose 
and benefit of becoming disenchanted and dispassionate towards the world. Becoming 
disenchanted and dispassionate towards the world, is the purpose and benefit of seeing and 
understanding how things really are. Seeing and understanding how things really are, is the 
purpose and benefit of samādhi. Samādhi is the purpose and benefit of experiencing bliss. Bliss 
is the purpose and benefit of experiencing tranquility throughout the body. Experiencing 
tranquility throughout the body is the purpose and benefit of having joy. Joy is the purpose and 
benefit of experiencing delight. Experiencing delight is the purpose and benefit of having non-
regret. Non-regret is the purpose and benefit of living a virtuous life with wholesome behavior. 
“So, you see, Bhikkhus, as one stage of development is completed, it overflows into another, 
while one advances and moves from one stage to the next, until finally the person traverses from 
the near shore to the farthest shore.” 
 
Sādhu 
Sādhu 
Sādhu
