[page 1]
Anguttara Nikāya 
The Numerical Discourses  
 
Tikanipāta  
(Book of the Threes) 
 
AN 3.130 
 
Dutiya Anuruddha Sutta  
“The Venerable Anuruddha – Part 2” 
 
Translated by Bhikkhu Candana 
 
Copyright © Bhikkhu Candana 2019, 2023 
 
 
Once, the Venerable Anuruddha approached the Venerable Sāriputta, and after 
exchanging friendly greetings with him, sat to one side and said to him: 
 
“Friend Sāriputta, through the Divine Eye, which is refined and far purer than others’, surpassing 
that of humans and other beings, I am able to clearly see and observe the thousand-fold world 
systems and galaxies.  
 
“Also, I possess untiring energy that is strong and tenacious, as it never slackens. 
 
“Furthermore, I see how my mindfulness is firmly established, while remaining consistent and 
un-fluttered, as the body becomes relaxed and tranquil, without experiencing any disturbances. 
Not to mention, the heart is so focused and collected in samādhi.  
 
“Yet, despite all this, my heart has not found Release, for it is still gripped by the defilements, as 
I am unable to shake them off through no longer holding or grabbing onto them.” 
 
And the Venerable Sāriputta replied by advising him:  
 
“Friend Anuruddha, whenever you reflect:  
 
‘…Through the Divine Eye, which is refined and far purer than others’, surpassing that of 
humans and other beings, I am able to clearly see and observe the thousand-fold world systems 
and galaxies,’  
 
“Well, this clearly shows that there is still conceit within you!

[page 2]
“And whenever, friend Anuruddha, you reflect:  
 
‘…Also, I possess untiring energy that is strong and tenacious, as it never slackens. 
Furthermore, I see how my mindfulness is firmly established, remaining consistent and un-
fluttered, while the body becomes relaxed and tranquil, without experiencing any disturbances. 
Not to mention, the heart is so focused and collected in samādhi,’  
 
“This, on the other hand, clearly shows that there is still restlessness found in you! 
 
“And when you declare:  
 
‘…Yet, despite all this, my heart has not found Release, for it is still gripped by the defilements, 
as I am unable to shake them off through no longer holding or grabbing onto them.’ 
 
“Well, this then, friend Anuruddha, clearly shows that you are full of remorse, for you are 
plagued with worrisome thoughts! 
 
“It will be so much better, friend Anuruddha, if you just dismiss these three unwholesome states; 
leave them behind and stop paying any attention to them, and instead, simply direct your heart 
straight to the Deathless Element, anchoring the heart firmly upon the Deathless itself!” 
 
Then, after some time had passed, the Venerable Anuruddha succeeded in dispelling these three 
unwholesome mental states, by leaving them behind, as he no longer paid any attention to them.  
Instead, he simply directed his heart straight to the Deathless Element, anchoring the heart firmly 
upon the Deathless itself. 
 
Thus, by persevering and maintaining his course of Practice, while striving alone, secluded, and 
withdrawn from the crowd, living heedfully and with resolution, the Venerable Anuruddha kept 
practicing diligently, and before long, he was able to, here and now, finally realize by himself, 
the Noble End of the Holy Life; experiencing for himself that unsurpassed knowledge for which 
sons of good families rightfully leave the household life and go forth into homelessness.  
 
And the Venerable Anuruddha knew and understood directly, with certainty unparalleled:  
 
‘Now, I directly Know and See, beyond the shadow of a doubt, that 
Rebirth is finally destroyed, never to be put back together again. 
The Holy Life has now been lived.  
What had to be done, is done and finished with. 
This is my very last birth.  
There is no more rebirth for me into any state of becoming, anywhere, anymore!’ 
 
Thus, the Venerable Anuruddha became one of the Arahants. 
 
Sādhu 
Sādhu 
Sādhu
