[page 1]
SN 35.240 
Salāyatanavagga Saṁyutta (On the Six Sense Bases) 
 
Āsīvisa Vagga 
The Section on Serpents 
Kummopama Sutta 
“The Tortoise Simile” 
Translated by Bhikkhu Candana 
Copyright © Bhikkhu Candana 2021 
 
I personally heard this.  
At one time, the Blessed One was living in the monastery offered by Anāthapiṇḍika at Jeta's 
grove, in Sāvatthi. 
There, the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus thus: 
“Bhikkhus, once there was a tortoise poised on the bank of a river, waiting to catch a prey one 
evening. 
Suddenly, the tortoise saw a fox approaching from the distance, as it came looking for a prey. 
The tortoise, realizing the danger, quickly pulled in all its limbs, together with its head, into its 
shell as it waited silently and without worry. 
“Bhikkhus, in seeing the tortoise from the distance, the fox came rushing and stood in 
anticipation as it waited near the tortoise, while reflecting: “if he puts out one or more of his 
limbs or head, I will bite and pull it out fully, killing and eating it right here.” 
“However, because the tortoise did not put out any of its limbs or head, the fox eventually went 
away angrily and upset, being disappointed for having lost his chance for a meal.” 
“In the same manner, Bhikkhus, Māra, the Evil One, constantly and unrelentingly waits on you, 
as he reflects: “Surely, I will get my chance by finding their weak spot, whether through the 
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, or mind.” 
“Therefore, Bhikkhus, live while carefully guarding your mental faculties. 
“Bhikkhus, in seeing a form or a shape, do not be taken by its particular details or features. 
Otherwise, if you were to leave the eye unprotected and unrestrained, then evil unwholesome 
thoughts of like and dislike will overwhelm your mind. Because of this, you must restrain 
yourselves as you guard the eye faculty, thereby fully protecting it.  
Bhikkhus, in hearing a sound, do not be taken by its particular details or features. Otherwise, if 
you were to leave the ears unprotected and unrestrained, then evil unwholesome thoughts of like 
and dislike will overwhelm your mind. Because of this, you must restrain yourselves as you 
guard the ear faculty, thereby fully protecting it.  
Bhikkhus, in smelling a fragrance or an odor, do not be taken by its particular details or features. 
Otherwise, if you were to leave the nose unprotected and unrestrained, then evil unwholesome

[page 2]
thoughts of like and dislike will overwhelm your mind. Because of this, you must restrain 
yourselves as you guard the nose faculty, thereby fully protecting it.  
Bhikkhus, in tasting a flavor, do not be taken by its particular details or features. Otherwise, if 
you were to leave the tongue unprotected and unrestrained, then evil unwholesome thoughts of 
like and dislike will overwhelm your mind. Because of this, you must restrain yourselves as you 
guard the tongue faculty, thereby fully protecting it.  
Bhikkhus, in touching a surface or a tactile object, do not be taken by its particular details or 
features. Otherwise, if you were to leave the body unprotected and unrestrained, then evil 
unwholesome thoughts of like and dislike will overwhelm your mind. Because of this, you must 
restrain yourselves as you guard the body faculty, thereby fully protecting it.  
Bhikkhus, in perceiving or knowing a concept or a thought, do not be taken by its particular 
details or features. Otherwise, if you were to leave the mind unprotected and unrestrained, then 
evil unwholesome thoughts of like and dislike will overwhelm your mind. Because of this, you 
must restrain yourselves as you guard the mind faculty, thereby fully protecting it.  
“In the same manner, Bhikkhus, when you live while being restrained and protecting the doors of 
your faculties, you too will disappoint Māra, the Evil One, as he turns and goes away angrily and 
upset for having lost his chance, much like the fox that walked away from the tortoise.” 
 
“Like the tortoise drawing his limbs into his shell, 
Bhikkhus, collect your thoughts together, standing alone 
No more intending to hurt anyone, 
The one who is extinguished, blames no one.” 
 
Sadhu 
 
Sadhu 
 
Sadhu
