[page 1]
AN 10.58 
 
Bhagavā Mūlaka Sutta  
“Rooted in The Blessed One” 
 
Translated by Bhikkhu Candana 
 
Copyright © Bhikkhu Candana 2023 
 
“Bhikkhus, if wandering ascetics of other sects were to ask you:  
‘Friends, what is the root of all things? How are all things born? Where do all things arise 
from? Where do all things converge and come together? What are all things headed by? What 
dominates and exercises authority over all things? What is the noblest thing that surmounts all 
things? What is the essence of all things? What is the culmination of all things, where they all 
merge? Where do all things terminate and find their conclusion?’ 
If you were to be asked these questions that require your explanation, what would be your 
responses to them?  
“Bhante, The Blessed One is the origin of the Dhamma. Our understanding of the Teachings is 
rooted in The Blessed One, for He is our Refuge. Now, it would be wonderful if The Blessed 
One would clarify the meaning of these questions by providing us with their appropriate 
answers. In that way, the Bhikkhus on hearing it from The Blessed One, will learn and carry it in 
their hearts.” 
“In that case, Bhikkhus, listen and attend carefully. I shall now speak.” 
“Yes, Lord!” the Bhikkhus responded. 
“Bhikkhus, if wandering ascetics of other sects were to ask you:  
‘Friends, what is the root of all things? How are all things born? Where do all things arise 
from? Where do all things converge and come together? What are all things headed by? What 
dominates and exercises authority over all things? What is the noblest thing that surmounts all 
things? What is the essence of all things? What is the culmination of all things, where they all 
merge? Where do all things terminate and find their conclusion?’ 
“Then, you should answer those wandering ascetics of other sects in the following manner: 
“Rooted in Desire are all things. 
“All things are born through Attention.  
“All things arise from Contact.

[page 2]
“All things converge and come together in Feelings.  
“Headed by Concentration are all things.  
“Mindfulness is what dominates them all, for it exercises authority over all things.  
“All things come to be surmounted by Wisdom: the noblest in all things.  
“The yielding of True Release is the essence of all things.  
“It is the Deathless, which all things merge into.  
“And all things terminate and find their conclusion in Nibbāna. 
“Therefore, Bhikkhus, if you were to be asked these questions by the wandering ascetics of other 
sects, then you must answer them in this manner.” 
 
 
 
 
Sādhu 
Sādhu 
Sādhu
