[page 1]
SN 47.42 
Saṁyutta Nikāya 
The Connected Discourses 
 
Mahāvagga Saṁyutta 
(Connected Discourses on the Great Section) 
Satipaṭṭhāna Saṁyutta 
(Connected Discourses on the Establishments of Mindfulness) 
Amata Vagga 
(The Section on The Deathless) 
 
Samudaya Sutta 
“The Arising” 
 
Translated by Bhikkhu Candana 
Copyright © Bhikkhu Candana 2024 
 
“Bhikkhus, I will now teach you the arising and the very ending of each of the Four 
Bases of Mindfulness Practice. 
 
“So, listen and pay careful attention to what I shall say.” 
 
“Yes, Bhante!” 
 
1. “Now what, Bhikkhus, is the arising, the very cause of the body? 
 
“Because of the nourishment one receives from consuming edible food, the body manifests. 
Hence, the food one continues to eat is the very condition, because of which the body arises. 
 
“But, with the ending of the nourishment received from edible food, the body itself comes to an 
end and ceases. 
 
2. “As for feelings, because of the nourishment one receives from making contact, feelings 
manifest. Hence, it is by continuously making contact with the world, that feelings arise. 
 
“But, with the ending of contact received from the world, feelings themselves come to an end, 
and cease.

[page 2]
3. “As it relates to the Citta and the various states of mind it undergoes, because of the presence 
of name and form (nāmarūpa), the mind becomes manifest, along with its various fluctuating 
states. Hence, it is by the continuous engagement with name and form, that the mind, along with 
its various states, arises. 
 
“But, with the ending of name and form (nāmarūpa), the Citta itself, together with its various 
states, comes to an end, and ceases. 
 
4. “As for the various dhammā or mind objects, because of the mental attention one gives to 
them, the various dhammā (or mind objects) manifest. After all, it is attention itself that turns 
them into ‘objects.’ 
 
“But, it is when you stop tolerating and giving attention to the mental objects appearing in the 
mind, that they can finally come to their end and cease.” 
 
 
 
Sādhu 
 
Sādhu 
 
Sādhu
