SN 35.107 - The Origin of the World
Translated by Bhikkhu Sujato
Source: https://suttacentral.net/sn35.107/en/sujato
License: CC0-1.0

Linked Discourses 35.107
11. Sanctuary from the Yoke
The Origin of the World
“Mendicants, I will teach you the origin and disappearance of the world. Listen …
And what, mendicants, is the origin of the world? Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a requirement for feeling. Feeling is a requirement for craving. Craving is a requirement for grasping. Grasping is a requirement for continued existence. Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth. Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. This is the origin of the world. …
Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a requirement for feeling. Feeling is a requirement for craving. Craving is a requirement for grasping. Grasping is a requirement for continued existence. Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth. Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. This is the origin of the world.
And what is the disappearance of the world? Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a requirement for feeling. Feeling is a requirement for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases no residue left behind, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. This is the disappearance of the world. …
Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a requirement for feeling. Feeling is a requirement for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases no residue left behind, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases … That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases. This is the disappearance of the world.”
