[page 1]
SN 47.41 
Saṁyutta Nikāya 
The Connected Discourses 
 
Mahāvagga Saṁyutta 
(The Great Section of the Connected Discourses) 
Satipaṭṭhāna Saṁyutta 
(Connected Discourses on the Four Bases of Mindfulness) 
Amata Vagga 
(The Section on The Deathless) 
 
Amata Sutta 
“The Deathless” 
 
Translated by Bhikkhu Candana 
Copyright © Bhikkhu Candana 2024 
 
Once, while in Sāvatthi, The Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus by saying: 
 
“Bhikkhus, you should develop the mind by diligently practicing the Four Bases of Mindfulness 
(Satipaṭṭhāna). 
 
“Do not let this rare opportunity of beating and overcoming death, once and for all, pass you by!  
“And what are these four? 
“Here, Bhikkhus, you must dedicate yourself to meditating while being fully attentive and aware 
of the body; carefully staying with the body, by observing whatever you detect to be the most 
pronounced bodily sensation that is occurring, at the time. Do this, as you train yourself ardently 
but without having any thoughts or attitudes of either longing or resentment towards the world.  
“Also, Bhikkhus, you must dedicate yourself to meditating while being fully attentive and aware 
of feelings; carefully staying with whatever feeling you detect to be the most pronounced feeling 
occurring at the time, mindful of it in all its transitions and everchanging states. Do this, as you 
train yourself ardently but without having any thoughts or attitudes of either longing or 
resentment towards the world.  
“Also, Bhikkhus, you must dedicate yourself to meditating while being fully attentive and aware 
of whatever state that is occurring in the Heart (Citta), carefully staying with whatever you detect 
to be the most pronounced state taking place at the time, within the Citta, remaining mindful of it

[page 2]
in all its transitions and everchanging states. Do this, as you train yourself ardently but without 
having any thoughts or attitudes of either longing or resentment towards the world.  
“And, Bhikkhus, you must dedicate yourself to meditating while being fully attentive and aware 
of whatever mental phenomena, idea or state (dhamma), along with the experiences that are 
occurring at the time; carefully staying with whatever you detect to be the most pronounced 
mental phenomenon or idea you experience, mindful of them in all their transitions and 
everchanging states. Do this, as you train yourself enthusiastically but without having any 
thoughts or attitudes of either longing or resentment towards the world.  
 
“Therefore, Bhikkhus, you must develop the mind by diligently practicing the Four Bases of 
Mindfulness. For in doing so, you will not let this rare opportunity of beating and overcoming 
death, once and for all, pass you by!” 
 
 
Sādhu 
 
Sādhu 
 
Sādhu
