[page 1]
Anguttara Nikāya 
The Numerical Discourses  
 
Dasakanipāta  
(Book of the Tens) 
 
AN 10.1 
 
Kimatthiya Sutta  
“The Purpose” 
 
Translated by Candana Bhikkhu 
 
Copyright © Candana Bhikkhu 2023 
 
I have personally heard this.  
At one time, The Blessed One was staying at the monastery offered by Anāthapindika in Jeta’s 
grove, in the City of Sāvatthi, when the Venerable Ānanda came and approached The Blessed 
One, and after worshipping and paying his respects, he sat to one side, and said:  
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of cultivating a virtuous wholesome behavior?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of cultivating a virtuous wholesome behavior is non-regret.” 
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of having non-regret?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of having non-regret is to experience delight.” 
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of experiencing delight?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of experiencing delight is joy.” 
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of experiencing joy?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of experiencing joy is tranquility of mind.” 
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of experiencing tranquility of mind?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of experiencing tranquility of mind is bliss.”

[page 2]
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of experiencing bliss?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of experiencing bliss is samādhi.” 
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of experiencing samādhi?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of samādhi is seeing and understanding, for the first time, how 
things truly are.” 
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of seeing and understanding (for the first time), how 
things truly are?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of seeing and understanding how things are, is to finally 
become disenchanted and dispassionate towards the world.” 
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of finally becoming disenchanted and dispassionate 
towards the world?” 
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of finally becoming disenchanted and dispassionate towards 
the world, is to directly know Liberation and to experience it, for oneself.” 
“Thus Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of cultivating a virtuous wholesome behavior is non-
regret. The purpose and benefit of having non-regret is to experience delight. The purpose and 
benefit of experiencing delight is joy. The purpose and benefit of experiencing joy is tranquility 
of mind. The purpose and benefit of experiencing tranquility of mind is bliss. The purpose and 
benefit of experiencing bliss is samādhi. The purpose and benefit of samādhi is seeing and 
understanding, for the first time, how things truly are. The purpose and benefit of seeing and 
understanding how things truly are, is to finally become disenchanted and dispassionate towards 
the world. The purpose and benefit of finally becoming disenchanted and dispassionate towards 
the world, is to directly know Liberation and to experience it, for oneself. 
“As you see Ānanda, cultivating a virtuous wholesome behavior leads one straight to the goal of 
the Holy Life.” 
 
Sādhu 
Sādhu 
Sādhu
